# The Galois field GF[2⁸] and polynomials over GF[2⁸]

Package gf256 implements arithmetic over the finite field GF[2⁸] as well as
over the polynomial ring with coefficients in GF[2⁸]. This is not an officially
supported Google product.

For background information on finite fields, see the Wikipedia pages on
[fields](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Field_%28mathematics%29), [finite
fields](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_field), and [finite field
arithmetic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_field_arithmetic).

## Computing with finite fields

“Every field of a finite number of marks may be represented as a Galois
field of order s=p^n, where p^n is a power of a prime. The GF[p^n] is
defined uniquely by its order, and is therefore independent of the particular
irreducible congruence used in its construction.” [W. H. Bussey, Tables of
Galois fields of order less than 1,000. Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 16(4):188–206, 1910.]

A standard way to construct a Galois field of order p^n is to take the
quotient of the polynomial ring over GF[p] with the ideal generated by an
irreducible polynomial of order n over GF[p]. For primes, GF[p] can be
represented by the integers modulo p.

This means that the Galois field GF[2⁸], which is a finite field of 256
elements, can be constructed as Z₂[x]/(x⁸+x⁴+x³+x²+1): the quotient of the ring
of polynomials with binary coefficients with the ideal generated by the
irreducible polynomial x⁸+x⁴+x³+x²+1. Concretely, this means that a number in
GF[2⁸] is represented as a polynomial of degree at most seven with binary
coefficients. In this library, an instantiation of GF[2⁸] is represented
by `struct Field` and elements of the field by `type Num`.

Addition and subtraction are equivalent operations in this representation and
amounts to adding/subtracting the coefficients of each term in the polynomial
modulo two. E.g., (x+1) + (x²+1) == x²+x. In this package, we represent an
element of GF[2⁸] by an 8-bit unsigned number where bit i represents the
coefficient of term x^i. This means that addition and subtraction of
polynomials can be done by a bitwise xor operation.

Multiplication can in principle be implemented as a normal polynomial
multiplication followed by reducing modulo the polynomial x⁸+x⁴+x³+x²+1.
However, it is more efficient to multiply using the identity ab =
exp(log(a)+log(b)) for suitable definitions of exp and log. For finite fields,
we define exp and log in terms of a generator g for the field: g is a generator
of GF[2⁸] if the numbers g^i generate all non-zero numbers in the field. Given
a generator g, exp(x) = g^x and log_g(y) is the number i such that g^i = y. A
common choice of generator for GF[2⁸] is the polynomial x, which is represented
by the bit vector 00000010, or, equivalently, by the unsigned integer 2.

## Polynomial rings over finite fields

Now that we have an implementation of GF[2⁸], we can also implement computation
over the polynomial ring GF[2⁸][x]: polynomials of arbitrary degree with
coefficients from GF[2⁸]. A natural representation of such a polynomial is
simply a slice of values from GF[2⁸] where position i in the slice contains the
coefficient of x^i in the polynomial. A polynomial is represented in this package
by `type Polynomial`, which can be initialized with a slice of values from GF[2⁸].
The go language allows us to specify a slice of unsigned integer values in an
initialization expression, which simplifies the syntax:

```
p := Polynomial{0xff, 0x01, 0x00, 0x17, 0x02, 0x01}
```

Addition of polynomials is then simply element-wise addition of the
corresponding slices.
Multiplication is most easily implemented using the [long multiplication
algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiplication_algorithm) with
addition and multiplication of coefficients being done in GF[2⁸]. Similarly,
division is most easily implemented using the [long division
algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Long_division).

## Conversion to readable formats

For printing, this package converts elements of GF[2⁸] to binary
strings. Polynomials are shown with x as the variable and with the
coefficients represented as powers of the generator (α) of the field.
